README.md, before:

# blocks

Conversion tools for block devices.

Convert between raw partitions, logical volumes, and bcache devices
witout moving data.  `blocks` shuffles blocks and sprouts superblocks.

## LVM conversion

`blocks to-lvm` (alias: `lvmify`) takes a block device (partition or
whole disk) containing a filesystem, shrinks the filesystem by a small
amount, and converts it to LVM in place.

The block device is converted to a physical volume and the filesystem is
converted to a logical volume.  If `--join=<VG>` is used the volumes
join an existing volume group.

An LVM conversion can be followed by other changes to the volume,
growing it to multiple disks with `vgextend` and `lvextend`, or
converting it to various RAID levels with `lvconvert --type=raidN
-m<extra-copies>`.

## bcache conversion

`blocks to-bcache` converts a block device (partition, logical volume,
LUKS device) to use bcache.  If `--join=<cset-uuid>` is used the device
joins an existing cache set.  Otherwise you will need to [create
and attach the cache device
manually](http://evilpiepirate.org/git/linux-bcache.git/tree/Documentation/bcache.txt?h=bcache-dev#n80).

`blocks` will pick one of several conversion strategies:

* one for partitions, which requires a shrinkable filesystem or free space
immediately before the partition to convert.  Converting a [logical partition](
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_boot_record)
to bcache is not supported:  if `blocks` complains about overlapping metadata
in the middle of the disk, please [use gdisk to convert your MBR disk to GPT](
http://falstaff.agner.ch/2012/11/20/convert-mbr-partition-table-to-gpt-ubuntu/)
and reinstall your bootloader before proceeding with the bcache conversion.
* one for LUKS volumes
* one for LVM logical volumes

When the first two strategies are unavailable, you can still convert
to bcache by converting to LVM first, then converting the new LV to
bcache.

You will need to install bcache-tools, which is available here:

* <http://evilpiepirate.org/git/bcache-tools.git/>
* <https://launchpad.net/~g2p/+archive/storage/> (`sudo add-apt-repository ppa:g2p/storage`)

Conversion makes no demands on the kernel, but to use bcache, you need
Linux 3.10 or newer.  [My own branch](https://github.com/g2p/linux/commits/for-3.11/bcache) currently adds
resizing support on top of [Kent Overstreet's upstream branch](http://evilpiepirate.org/git/linux-bcache.git/).

### maintboot mode

Maintboot mode (`blocks to-bcache --maintboot`) is an easier way
to convert in-use devices that doesn't require a LiveCD.
[maintboot](https://github.com/g2p/maintboot) will run
the conversion from an in-memory boot environment.
This is currently tested on Ubuntu; ports to other
distributions are welcome.

# Ubuntu PPA

You can install python3-blocks from a PPA and skip the rest
of the installation section.

    sudo apt-get install software-properties-common
    sudo add-apt-repository ppa:g2p/storage
    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install python3-blocks bcache-tools

# Requirements

Python 3.3, pip and Git are required before installing.

You will also need libparted (2.3 or newer, library and headers) and
libaugeas (library only, 1.0 or newer).

On Debian/Ubuntu (Ubuntu raring is recommended):

    sudo aptitude install python3.3 python3-pip git libparted-dev libaugeas0 \
        pkg-config libpython3.3-dev gcc
    sudo aptitude install cryptsetup lvm2 liblzo2-dev \
        nilfs-tools reiserfsprogs xfsprogs e2fsprogs btrfs-tools  # optional
    type pip-3.3 || alias pip-3.3='python3.3 -m pip.runner'

Command-line tools for LVM2, LUKS, bcache (see above), filesystem
resizing (see below for btrfs) are needed if those formats are involved.
Kernel support isn't required however, so you can do bcache conversions
from a live-cd/live-usb for example.

For btrfs resizing, you need a package that provides `btrfs-show-super`,
or you can install from source:

* <http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/mason/btrfs-progs.git>

# Installation

    pip-3.3 install --user -r <(wget -O- https://raw.github.com/g2p/blocks/master/requirements.txt)
    cp -lt ~/bin ~/.local/bin/blocks

# Usage

## Converting your root filesystem to LVM

Install LVM.

Edit your `/etc/fstab` to refer to filesystems by UUID, and regenerate
your initramfs so that it picks up the new tools.

With grub2, you don't need to switch to a separate boot
partition, but make sure grub2 installs `lvm.mod` inside your `/boot`.

Make sure your backups are up to date, boot to live media ([Ubuntu raring
liveusb](http://cdimage.ubuntu.com/daily-live/current/) is a good
choice), install blocks, and convert.

## Converting your root filesystem to bcache

Install bcache-tools and a recent kernel (3.10 or newer).
If your distribution uses Dracut (Fedora), you need Dracut 0.31 or newer.

Edit your `/etc/fstab` to refer to filesystems by UUID, and regenerate
your initramfs so that it picks up the new tools.
On Debian, Ubuntu, and OpenSUSE, this is done with `update-initramfs -u -k all`.
With Dracut, this is done with `dracut -f`.

Edit your `grub.cfg` to refer to filesystems by UUID on the kernel
command-line (this is often the case, except when you are already using
LVM, in which case `update-grub` tends to write a logical path).  Make
sure you have a separate `/boot` partition.

1. If you don't have a cache device yet

        sudo make-bcache -C /dev/<SSD-backed-device>
   This will give you a cache-set uuid

2. If you already have a cache device

        ls /sys/fs/bcache
   And copy the cache-set uuid

3. Finally, if you have a maintboot-compatible distribution, run:

        sudo blocks to-bcache --maintboot /dev/<root-device> --join <cset-uuid>
   If you are using encryption, use the encrypted device as the root device.

4. Otherwise,
make sure your backups are up to date, boot to live media ([Ubuntu raring
liveusb](http://cdimage.ubuntu.com/daily-live/current/) is a good
choice), install blocks, and convert.

## bcache on a fresh install

When using a distribution installer that doesn't support bcache
at the partitioning stage, make sure the installer creates a
separate `/boot` partition.  Install everything on the HDD,
using whatever layout you prefer (but I suggest LVM if you want
multiple partitions).

Once the installer is done, you can follow the steps at
[converting your root filesystem to bcache](#converting-your-root-filesystem-to-bcache).

## Subcommand help

    blocks --help
    blocks <subcommand> --help

If `blocks` isn't in the shell's command path, replace with:

    sudo python3.3 -m blocks

# Build status

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/g2p/blocks.png)](https://travis-ci.org/g2p/blocks)

Commit message:

Mention the mkinitcpio hook
And stop mentioning OpenSUSE.
It has its own (underdocumented) initramfs tool:
/lib/mkinitrd/scripts
https://gitorious.org/opensuse/mkinitrd/source/scripts

README.md, after:

# blocks

Conversion tools for block devices.

Convert between raw partitions, logical volumes, and bcache devices
witout moving data.  `blocks` shuffles blocks and sprouts superblocks.

## LVM conversion

`blocks to-lvm` (alias: `lvmify`) takes a block device (partition or
whole disk) containing a filesystem, shrinks the filesystem by a small
amount, and converts it to LVM in place.

The block device is converted to a physical volume and the filesystem is
converted to a logical volume.  If `--join=<VG>` is used the volumes
join an existing volume group.

An LVM conversion can be followed by other changes to the volume,
growing it to multiple disks with `vgextend` and `lvextend`, or
converting it to various RAID levels with `lvconvert --type=raidN
-m<extra-copies>`.

## bcache conversion

`blocks to-bcache` converts a block device (partition, logical volume,
LUKS device) to use bcache.  If `--join=<cset-uuid>` is used the device
joins an existing cache set.  Otherwise you will need to [create
and attach the cache device
manually](http://evilpiepirate.org/git/linux-bcache.git/tree/Documentation/bcache.txt?h=bcache-dev#n80).

`blocks` will pick one of several conversion strategies:

* one for partitions, which requires a shrinkable filesystem or free space
immediately before the partition to convert.  Converting a [logical partition](
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Extended_boot_record)
to bcache is not supported:  if `blocks` complains about overlapping metadata
in the middle of the disk, please [use gdisk to convert your MBR disk to GPT](
http://falstaff.agner.ch/2012/11/20/convert-mbr-partition-table-to-gpt-ubuntu/)
and reinstall your bootloader before proceeding with the bcache conversion.
* one for LUKS volumes
* one for LVM logical volumes

When the first two strategies are unavailable, you can still convert
to bcache by converting to LVM first, then converting the new LV to
bcache.

You will need to install bcache-tools, which is available here:

* <http://evilpiepirate.org/git/bcache-tools.git/>
* <https://launchpad.net/~g2p/+archive/storage/> (`sudo add-apt-repository ppa:g2p/storage`)

Conversion makes no demands on the kernel, but to use bcache, you need
Linux 3.10 or newer.  [My own branch](https://github.com/g2p/linux/commits/for-3.11/bcache) currently adds
resizing support on top of [Kent Overstreet's upstream branch](http://evilpiepirate.org/git/linux-bcache.git/).

### maintboot mode

Maintboot mode (`blocks to-bcache --maintboot`) is an easier way
to convert in-use devices that doesn't require a LiveCD.
[maintboot](https://github.com/g2p/maintboot) will run
the conversion from an in-memory boot environment.
This is currently tested on Ubuntu; ports to other
distributions are welcome.

# Ubuntu PPA

You can install python3-blocks from a PPA and skip the rest
of the installation section.

    sudo apt-get install software-properties-common
    sudo add-apt-repository ppa:g2p/storage
    sudo apt-get update
    sudo apt-get install python3-blocks bcache-tools

# Requirements

Python 3.3, pip and Git are required before installing.

You will also need libparted (2.3 or newer, library and headers) and
libaugeas (library only, 1.0 or newer).

On Debian/Ubuntu (Ubuntu raring is recommended):

    sudo aptitude install python3.3 python3-pip git libparted-dev libaugeas0 \
        pkg-config libpython3.3-dev gcc
    sudo aptitude install cryptsetup lvm2 liblzo2-dev \
        nilfs-tools reiserfsprogs xfsprogs e2fsprogs btrfs-tools  # optional
    type pip-3.3 || alias pip-3.3='python3.3 -m pip.runner'

Command-line tools for LVM2, LUKS, bcache (see above), filesystem
resizing (see below for btrfs) are needed if those formats are involved.
Kernel support isn't required however, so you can do bcache conversions
from a live-cd/live-usb for example.

For btrfs resizing, you need a package that provides `btrfs-show-super`,
or you can install from source:

* <http://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/mason/btrfs-progs.git>

# Installation

    pip-3.3 install --user -r <(wget -O- https://raw.github.com/g2p/blocks/master/requirements.txt)
    cp -lt ~/bin ~/.local/bin/blocks

# Usage

## Converting your root filesystem to LVM

Install LVM.

Edit your `/etc/fstab` to refer to filesystems by UUID, and regenerate
your initramfs so that it picks up the new tools.

With grub2, you don't need to switch to a separate boot
partition, but make sure grub2 installs `lvm.mod` inside your `/boot`.

Make sure your backups are up to date, boot to live media ([Ubuntu raring
liveusb](http://cdimage.ubuntu.com/daily-live/current/) is a good
choice), install blocks, and convert.

## Converting your root filesystem to bcache

Install bcache-tools and a recent kernel (3.10 or newer).
If your distribution uses Dracut (Fedora), you need Dracut 0.31 or newer.

Edit your `/etc/fstab` to refer to filesystems by UUID, and regenerate
your initramfs so that it picks up the new tools.
On Debian and Ubuntu, this is done with `update-initramfs -u -k all`.
With Dracut, this is done with `dracut -f`.
Arch Linux users should enable the bcache hook in `mkinitcpio.conf`
and rerun `mkinitcpio`.

Edit your `grub.cfg` to refer to filesystems by UUID on the kernel
command-line (this is often the case, except when you are already using
LVM, in which case `update-grub` tends to write a logical path).  Make
sure you have a separate `/boot` partition.

1. If you don't have a cache device yet

        sudo make-bcache -C /dev/<SSD-backed-device>
   This will give you a cache-set uuid

2. If you already have a cache device

        ls /sys/fs/bcache
   And copy the cache-set uuid

3. Finally, if you have a maintboot-compatible distribution, run:

        sudo blocks to-bcache --maintboot /dev/<root-device> --join <cset-uuid>
   If you are using encryption, use the encrypted device as the root device.

4. Otherwise,
make sure your backups are up to date, boot to live media ([Ubuntu raring
liveusb](http://cdimage.ubuntu.com/daily-live/current/) is a good
choice), install blocks, and convert.

## bcache on a fresh install

When using a distribution installer that doesn't support bcache
at the partitioning stage, make sure the installer creates a
separate `/boot` partition.  Install everything on the HDD,
using whatever layout you prefer (but I suggest LVM if you want
multiple partitions).

Once the installer is done, you can follow the steps at
[converting your root filesystem to bcache](#converting-your-root-filesystem-to-bcache).

## Subcommand help

    blocks --help
    blocks <subcommand> --help

If `blocks` isn't in the shell's command path, replace with:

    sudo python3.3 -m blocks

# Build status

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/g2p/blocks.png)](https://travis-ci.org/g2p/blocks)
